Applying Hindley-Milner to unit-checking. (#3491)
modelica/ModelicaSpecification: RationaleMCP/0027/HindleyMilner.md

# Unit checking

Unit checking is the process of inferring the units of Modelica variables, and ensuring the variables are used consistently in expressions and equations.

> It takes place after any evaluation of evaluable parameters and no evaluable parameters shall be evaluated during this process.

Reviewer: Clarify - it is important:
- ThermoFluidStream has units depending on evaluable parameters (different if-branches with evaluable condition)
- Exponents

Alternative implementation: - collect unit-constraints from original equations based on evaluated parameters; should give same result.
@qlambert-pro has variant text for this

(This must be true as long as tools allow the users to opt-out from unit-checking.)

It is performed by using a type inference algorithm, albeit adapted to work with units.

> The algorithm proposed here is based on the Hindley-Milner algorithm.

Reviewer: Probably not include this detail in the specification.

At a high level the algorithm collects a set of constraints on the units of expressions.
It extracts a set of substitutions from these constraints which once applied determine whether a variable has a unit and what that unit would be.
Any inconsistency discovered during this process is a unit error, and any unit expression that contains remaining unknowns at the end of the process is considered unknown.

The document is organized as follows:
* [Introduction of what is meant by the unit of a variable](#the-unit-of-a-modelica-variable)
* [Description of the objects used in the inference algorithm](#unit-constraints-and-meta-expressions)
* [Definition of unit equivalence and convertibility](#unit-equivalence-and-convertibility)

> * [Unit inference algorihtm](#unit-inference)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Unit inference algorithm](#unit-inference)
```

* [Application to Modelica](#unit-constraints-of-a-modelica-model)
* [Modelica operators on units](#modelica-operators-on-units)
* [Extensions and limitations](#possible-extensions-and-current-limits)

## The unit of a Modelica variable

The unit of a Modelica variable is the unit associated with the variable after unit-checking has been performed, possibly remaining unknown.

> Note that the unit of a variable is not the same concept as the `unit`-attribute of the variable, but in a unit-consistent model, the unit will be equal to the `unit`-attribute when present.

Reviewer: Hans: Prefer something like.
If the variable has a unit-attribute that will be unit of the variable.
Otherwise it may be derived.

## Unit constraints and meta-expressions

Unit constraints are introduced in the form of an [equivalence](#equivalence) of two unit _meta-expressions_.
After an evaluation stage, a unit constraint of the form _`u1` is equivalent to `u2`_ will be represented by the _single-sided form_ `u1*u2^-1`.

This section outlines the different constructs that comprise meta-expressions.

### Variables

> The unit of the Modelica variable `var` is represented by the unit variable `var.unit`.

Reviewer: Alternative u[var] or unit[var] ?

Reviewer 2: Sure, there will be better options for how to typeset once we move to LaTeX.

Reviewer 2: Indeed, we should find a notation without such coupling.

- `"s"` is convertible to `"ms"`, since they differ by base unit scaling.
- `"K"` is convertible to `"degC"`.
- `"kN"` is convertible to `"W.s/mm"`.

`empty` units and `undefined` units are never convertible to each other, themselves or any `well-formed` units.

## Unit inference

### Modified Hindley-Milner

The original Hindley-Milner algorithm is designed to infer types, and consists of building a set of substitutions that returns the type of any expression of a given program.
Applying this algorithm to perform unit inference in Modelica comes with two important differences:
  * Not all variables must have a unit in a given model.
  * There are operations on meta-expressions, that is, not all constraints are of the form  _`var1.unit` is equivalent to `var2.unit`_.

#### Solvability of constraints

After meta-expression evaluation and gathering of variables in the single-sided form, a constraint's solvability can be determined using:
* A set `V` of unit variables present with non-zero exponent.
* A set `D` of unit variables, present inside a `der` meta-expression.

With this information, a variable `var.unit` can be solved from a given constraint if:

> * `var.unit` is present in `V`, but not in `D`.

Reviewer: I understand that this was designed to handle `der(x)=-x;` without reporting errors.

However, as far as I understand that also means that if we have `der(x)=velocity;` we cannot deduce the unit of `x`, which would be a step backwards.  To me it instead makes sense to state that only variables that occur exactly once can be solved from the constraint - which gives a similar result for this `der(x)=-x;`, but handles `der(x)=velocity;`.

The disadvantage is that we can then not deduce the unit of x in `x*x=area;` or `x+x=area;`. However, such examples are bit silly, especially as they can be written as `x^2=area;` or `2*x=area;`.

Author: > #### der
> Consider the meta-expression `der(e)`.
> * In a constraint where a `well-formed` unit is present, it evaluates to `e * ("s" ^ -1)`.
> [...]
> ### Evaluation
> [...]
> After evaluation a constraint will not contain both a well-formed unit and a `der` meta-expression.
...

Feel free to rephrase so that it is clearer.
At the end of the day the complexity associated with relaxing unit-checking is why we felt the need to spell out the algorithm in painstaking details in this document.

Reviewer: My proposal is not rephrase it, but instead state that only variables that only occur once in a constraint can have their unit inferred.

Author: Which would make the following invalid right?
```
model Test3
  Real x;
  Real y;
  equation
  der(x) = y;
  y = -x;
end Test3;
```

Reviewer: > Which would make the following invalid right?
> 
> ```
> model Test3
>   Real x;
>   Real y;
>   equation
>   der(x) = y;
>   y = -x;
> end Test3;
> ```

No, since we cannot start the process.
Similarly as not being able to deduce units for `x` and `y` based on:
 `sin(x/y)=...; cos(y*x)=...; `

Author: In the language of this proposal, you would want for the unit of `sin`, `cos` and `der` to be `undefined`?

Reviewer: > In the language of this proposal, you would want for `sin` and `cos` to not impose any constraint on their argument, as well as expressions containing `der` to have `undefined` unit?

I would rather that:
-  `sin` and `cos` impose unit="1" (or "rad") for input.
-  `sin` and `cos` impose unit="1" for output.
- der(x) impose that unit(der(x))=unit(x) * "s-1" (or something like that)

Author: What would you conclude for the following mode:
```
model Test4
  Real x;
  Real y;
  Real c(unit = "m");
equation
  c = x + x*y;
end Test4;
```

Reviewer: Yes, and x.unit="m" (based on c=x... where c.unit="m") and y.unit="1" (based on c=...+x*y; where c.unit="m" and x.unit="m"). I agree that it takes some care to specify the constraints that unit(a+b)=unit(a)=unit(b); to not get stuck on unit for x*y.

    * If `u` is a `well-formed` unit, then this is the unit of `var`. (Given that no unit errors have been detected, a variable with a `unit`-attribute will get the given unit.)
    * Otherwise, the unit of `var` is unknown.

## Unit constraints of a Modelica model

The following rules describe the unit meta-expression of a given Modelica expression, where it makes sense.
They also provide the constraints that arise from different Modelica constructs.

When it is specified that _`u1` must be equivalent to `u2`_, the corresponding constraint should be collected.

In this section, the unit meta-expression of expression `e` is called `e.unit` and conditions of conditional constraints are highlighted with [].

### Variables
If `var` has a declared `unit`-attribute, `var.unit` must be equivalent to it.

`var.unit` must be equivalent to the unit of the following attributes if present:
 * `start`
 * `min`
 * `max`
 * `nominal`

(`var.unit` should be convertible to the `displayUnit`-attribute of `var` if it is present, but there is no corresponding constraints for the unit inference.)

Consider the expression `e` of the form `var`, where `var` is a Modelica variable.

> * If `var` doesn't have a declared unit attribute, and has constant component variablity, `e.unit` is the `empty` unit.

Reviewer 2: I believe this is the refined rule for constants which we agreed to at the meeting in Linköping:
```suggestion
* If `var` is a constant without declared `unit`-attribute, `e.unit` is determined by evaluating the unit of the declaration equation.
  When the declaration equation's unit is well-formed, it is propagated to `e.unit`.
  Otherwise, `e.unit` is the `empty` unit, preventing it from being determined by general unit inference.
```

* Otherwise, `e.unit` is `var.unit`.

### Literals

> `Real` literals have `empty` unit.

Reviewer: Integers are handled by cast to Real (so that no unit-checking for integer expresssions).

### Binary operations
Consider an expression `e` of the form `e1 op e2`.

#### Additive operators
* `e.unit` must be equivalent to `e1.unit`.
* `e.unit` must be equivalent to `e2.unit`.

Note that this requires introducing an intermediate variable to represent `e.unit`.
This allows unit propagation when one of the operand has `empty` unit.

#### Multiplication
`e.unit` is `e1.unit * e2.unit`.

#### Division
`e.unit` is `e1.unit * (e2.unit ^ -1)`.

#### Relational operators
`e1.unit` must be equivalent to `e2.unit`

#### Power operator

> * `e.unit` must be equivalent to `e1.unit ^ e2`.

Reviewer: Include sqrt and nthPower for rational ones, and don't do it for power operator.

Reviewer 2: I see the need to cover `sqrt` and `nthPower`, but why not have rules for the power operator?

Reviewer: Well, separate the power operator into two:
- The one with integer exponent as above
- Non-integer exponents where both e1 and e2 must have unit "1"

* If [`e2` wasn't evaluated or is a `Real` expression], `e1.unit` must be equivalent to `"1"`.

Note that this requires introducing an intermediate variable to represent `e.unit`.
Technically, `e2` is a Modelica expression rather than a rational number, which means that `e1.unit ^ e2` cannot be represented as a unit meta-expression.
In practice, if the condition of the second constraint is verified, `e1.unit ^ e2` is `"1"` and if it isn't verified, then it can be represented as a meta-expression.

(If the exponent was not evaluated or is a `Real`, the unit of the base should be `"1"`.)
(It is up for discussion, when `e2` is `Real`, whether `e2.unit` should be equivalent to `"1"`. It could be handled in a similar way as transcendental functions. See below.)

### Function calls
Consider the expression `e` of the form `f(e1, e2, …, en)`.
* If the output of the function has a declared unit, `e.unit` is the declared unit.
* `e.unit` is `undefined` otherwise.

If function input `i` has a declared unit, `ei.unit` must be equivalent to this unit.

The natural generalization to functions with multiple outputs applies.

> ### Transcendental functions

Reviewer: Note that this will give different rules for the inputs to sin and Modelica.Math.sin.

Reviewer 2: Will it?  What I see is that both variants would accept both empty unit arguments and arguments of unit equivalent to `"1"`.  The difference I see is that there is a specification for the unit of `sin(1.0'rad')`, whereas `Modelica.Math.sin(1.0'rad')` has undefined unit for now.

Once we get the chance to work on unit inference rules for functions, I hope we can make sure that `Modelica.Math.sin(1.0'rad')` gets unit `"1"`.  Then, the only remaining difference will be that `Modelica.Math.sin(angle)` can be used to infer that `angle` has unit `"rad"`, while `sin(angle)` doesn't impose a unit on `angle`.

Reviewer: Why not improve it so that the rules are the same?

Reviewer 2: Because I imagine that we want the built-in functions to be usable in unit-free expressions like this (it is not strictly necessary to think of `sin` as a function for trigonometry):
```
Real x(unit = "m") = 1.0 + sin(1.0);
```

At the same time, I think we would like this to be a unit error as long as the input of `Modelica.Math.sin` has a declared unit:
```
Real x(unit = "m") = 1.0 + Modelica.Math.sin(1.0);
```

However, I think it is too early to think deeply about how unit checking for the non-builtin functions should behave.

> As examples of transcendental functions, consider `sin`, `sign`, and `atan2`.

Reviewer: The `sign` function is as far as I understand not a transcendental function, as they are defined as non-polynomial analytic functions, and I'm a bit unsure about `atan2`.

More importantly neither of those functions should use the rules for transcendental functions:
- The sign-function is just comparing a value to zero; the unit of the input doesn't matter.
- The atan2-function should ideally be defined as `atan2(y, x)=atan(y/x);` i.e. the two inputs should have the same unit - but it is perfectly normal to use atan2 for variables with unit.

Author: > * The sign-function is just comparing a value to zero; the unit of the input doesn't matter.

It does if it is a temperature.
 
> * The atan2-function should ideally be defined as `atan2(y, x)=atan(y/x);` i.e. the two inputs should have the same unit - but it is perfectly normal to use atan2 for variables with unit.

This is what is specified here.

Reviewer: > > * The sign-function is just comparing a value to zero; the unit of the input doesn't matter.
> 
> It does if it is a temperature.

No.

Or with more words: it's more complicated - the unit sort of matters if it is an absolute temperature, but not if it is a temperature difference (and the unit system doesn't separate the two). And in the SI-system, which we base the unit handling on, absolute temperatures are measures in Kelvin and using the sign for an absolute temperature in Kelvin is kind of meaningless.

Similarly you should normally use sign for voltages, not potentials; and for relative positions (or velocities) - not absolute positions. The unit system doesn't separate them, and there are lots of models using sign for variables with units (fluid, mechanical, etc) - and they make sense.

Author: Fair enough for `sign`, I agree that we would need to ensures that the values is a difference.

Author: I just had another look at sign, the specification doesn't enforce any unit on its argument, it is just specifying that sign(-1) should behave as a literal.

Consider an expression `e` of the form `sign(e1)`.
* If `e1.unit` is `empty`, then so is `e.unit`.
* If `e1.unit` is not `empty`, then `e.unit` is `"1"`.

Consider an expression `e` of the form `atan2(e1, e2)`.
* If `e1.unit` must be equivalent to `e2.unit`.
* If `e1.unit` or `e2.unit` is `undefined`, then so is `e.unit`.
* If `e1.unit` and `e2.unit` are `empty`, then so is `e.unit`.
* If `e1.unit` or `e2.unit` is not `empty`, then `e.unit` is `"1"`.

Implementation note: The rule above can be implemented as making `e.unit` equivalent to both `e1.unit * e1.unit^-1` and `e2.unit * e2.unit^-1`.

### Operator der
The unit of the expression `der(e)` is `der(e.unit)`.

### If-expressions
Consider the expression `e` of the form `if cond then e1 else e2`.
If [`cond` was not evaluated]:
* `e.unit` must be equivalent to `e1.unit`.
* `e.unit` must be equivalent to `e2.unit`.

If [`cond` was evaluated], `e.unit` must be equivalent to the unit of the selected branch.

Note that this requires introducing a intermediate variable to represent `e.unit`.

> 

Reviewer: Add other functions/operators like: sample, hold, fill, etc.
